Felly oeddwch wedi'i gyrraedd fel Cliddart?
Yn.
Oedd dim oeddwch wedi'i gyrraedd?
Merlyn Curran, Tyn Hyll.
O, dwi'n dweud, pan oeddwn i'n mynd i'r Cliddart.
Felly oeddwch wedi'i mynd i'r Tyn Hyll?
O, oeddwch wedi'i mynd i'r Tyn Hyll i'r
ffrindiau.
Felly oeddwch wedi'i mynd i'r Cliddart?
Ym Mhort Str, yng ngorllewin.
Roedd hynny'n gyda phamol?
Ym ffrindiau, oed.
A beth ddod oeddwch wedi'i ddod?
Roeddwn i'n mynd i'r Cliddart
yn ddod oedd ym mhob,
ac roeddwn i'n mynd i'r Cliddart.
Yn oed?
Rwy'n meddwl bod yna, 16 oed, yn oed.
A roeddwch wedi'i mynd i'r Cliddart?
Roeddwn i'n mynd i'r Tyn Hyll
yn ddod oedd ym mhob,
a'n grifio'n fawr,
a'n gwybod fy mhobau.
Nid oeddwn i'n mynd i'r Cliddart.
A'n gobeithio'n ym mhobau.
Felly roeddwn i'n mynd i'r Cliddart
roeddwn i'n mynd i'r Cliddart.
Felly beth ysgol wedi'i ddod oedd ym mhob?
Ym,
oedd yn y Chyrwyd Sain Mary
i'r ffrindiau.
Yna roedd ym mhob yn ddod oedd ym mhob
a yna rwy'n mynd i'r Gellionan.
a'r ym mhob yn ddod oedd ym mhob
ym mhob yn ddod oedd ym mhob.
Felly roeddwn yn ddod oedd ym mhob?
O, oeddwn i'n ddod oedd ym mhob,
ond roeddwn yn fawr gyda'r gyrk o Llewyr
Roeddwn yn sôn hynny
roeddwn yn sôn hynny
neu'n ddod o ddod oedd ym mhob
roeddwn yn ddod oedd ym mhob
a'r Gellionan gydag
wedi'i debyg,
a'i gynnyddio o Gyngor
wedi'i ddod oedd ym mhob
oedd yn ddod oedd ym mhob
i'r gyrk,
oherwydd roeddwn wedi'i ddod oedd ym mhob
roeddwn yn ddod oedd ym mhob
I said, what's that?
What did she say?
Oh, she said don't go into school, but go to school at the same time and come home at the same time
and pretend you've been in school.
But I was a dirty, I had a pen, with the pen in it, the ink were, and I always had ink on my two fingers.
So you were supposed to be re-healing?
Yes, and the pen with the nib you had to change with the wooden handle.
So how did it work?
I put it in the ink then, just wrote like that then.
Always that was the traces that I had been to school.
Well, three days went by, I used to meet her and we had a penny to go to school
and I used to go to Reese the Bakehouse then, it was a little corner grocery shop by the school,
and get a bun, and I liked oxo.
So Jess ate the oxo, and I still love it now, the fresh bread roll.
And we'd go down the park.
Which park was that?
In Cwdda, what's the name of the park?
Pwjbach?
No, Pwjbach.
And we went down there, and we'd be on the swings and Jess messing around all day, timed it,
as they'd come out of school, we'd get home.
And this particular day my grandmother said to me,
Oh, there's someone inside waiting to see you.
Oh, I thought to my mother, because she could only come up once a month to see me.
And oh, she said, I've noticed these last few days Olive, your hands have been clean, there's no ink on them.
Oh, I've got to change my pen, Grandma.
Oh, well that's good.
Would you like to go and see who it is?
I went in, it was Mr Morris, the boardman.
What's the boardman?
Well, if you didn't attend school, they'd come round to check where you were and what was wrong with you.
And so he was sitting there.
Well, hello Olive, it's nice to see you, he said, they're missing you in school.
And I couldn't say I hadn't been to school, because it would be telling a lie.
And I know I'd be punished with my grandmother.
I wasn't hit, never had to hit me, but I wasn't allowed out for a week.
I was allowed to sit in the window and watch all my friends play, but I wasn't allowed out.
Of course he questioned me why I hadn't been to school, and I'd done the wrong thing by saying that,
well, if Thomas can mitch school, well I can.
Well, I've dealt with Thomas for a few times now, he said, and I don't like you befriending her with her habits.
She was a lovely girl. She never mitched after.
Because her parents didn't know anything about it. Her sister covered for her every time.
And so from then on I had ink on my fingers.
Because my grandmother took me to school every day, stood in lines with me,
and embarrassed me by taking me in the class and sitting with me until the teacher came and then redished her.
And met me coming home from school, coming out of school.
So I learnt my lesson. Three days out of my life I mitched school. Beth, I did love school.
And you talked about the pens, so what was the desk like?
Much nicer than what they were now. I mean, you sat at a desk, individual desk we had,
and the inkwell was on the top. You could lift the top to put your books in and whatever you had.
And then the inkwell was usually on the right hand side.
Was the seats connected to the front?
No, no. They were in two bits, the ones we had.
Were they single desks?
A chair and single desks, yes.
Islwyn, you were in school when war broke out. Can you tell me a little bit about what it was like?
War broke out in September 1939 and I was seven years of age.
I was in the Cliddwchd Junior School.
Well, after a few days there was talk of the war breaking out and the next thing we knew we were marching down street to the Pegen Office in Brook Street,
which is the Old and Unemployment Office, is where the new chapel now is built in Brook Street.
So, Gaby, you had daily gas mask drill while you were in school. Can you tell me a bit about that?
As soon as the war started we had these gas masks and every day then we were taught drills.
One of the drills was that the teacher would drill the whistle and they'd put your gas mask on and the next part then you'd dive underneath the desks.
The hands flat out underneath the drill. That was a drill.
Now you'd get that for about two or three weeks until we knew that once that whistle went it was very important that we had to lie down, everybody, in the class.
But if it happened in the school yard in the junior school we'd either have to lie down on the floors we were taught or if you had time you'd run underneath the shelter.
And the girls up the top end of the school then would open the gate and all run down, which had happened not very often in the day, so two or three times.
You were issued with a gas mask and I gather you had to be taught how to...
Oh yeah, the orders came now. We all go up to the school and the centre they would issue the gas masks in the school, adults and children.
And my mother took me up, about ten I was, you know.
Everybody now trying, this gas mask on and you couldn't see the face, you didn't know who was by your side, you know.
And you could, boom, boom, boom, noise, you couldn't talk. Everybody was fitted with a gas mask anyway.
And then you had to take it to school every day. First of all it came in a cardboard box, well that didn't last a week.
And then you had tin canisters and my mother bought me a tin canister and he put the gas mask in there, you know.
And it lasted then. Everybody had a gas mask, the whole nation had a gas mask, that must have caused something, you know.
I went to Cliddock Infant School and I went to Cliddock Junior School.
And my memory for me is going swimming in the Hope and Air Palace where Danny, if he didn't go in, he stuck this rope around you and he just tucked you in.
St. Goswin.
And I can remember in the Cliddock Infant School there was a Welsh stream.
I think his name was Mamie Williams taught them all.
And every one of those children who was taught in the Welsh stream passed this scholarship to go to St. Limerro Grammar.
And so she was a wonderful teacher, apparently. I was in Cliddock Junior School at the stream.
And my main thing to remember is that I sat next to Derek Begburn, the International.
I was going to school in St. Joseph's Convent.
Thinking that today it's Monner Park, the staircase, I thought it was enormous when I used to go up on my birthday to the Reverend Mother and we'd have a sweet and lonely picture, you know.
It was a wonderful thing to do.
I remember the first time the first person, one of the nuns, Sister Camilla's, and she came in and I was going up the stairs, because we had to dust the stairs sometimes with the carpets for the stairs.
And it was my turn probably to do that. And she came in and she took her habit off and nobody ever saw a nun without her hair, you know.
And she threw it in the air and she said, I passed my driving test.
Yippee! And she said, Mary Davies, you didn't see that. You didn't see that!
And I think of a fella coming back many years ago and he was a boarder there in the 50s with myself and he said, where's my sister Margaret Treaser?
And she was in bed so he went in to see her. She said, what you doing now?
He said, I'm a bodyguard. And she said, who are you a bodyguard for? He said, I'm a bodyguard to Madonna. He was Madonna's bodyguard.